Creational Patterns

    Abstract Factory - Provide an interface for creating families of related or
        dependent objects without specifying their concrete classes

    Factory method - Define an interface for creating a single object.

    Prototype - Specify the kinds of objects to create using a prototypical instance and
        create new objects by copying this prototype

    Singleton - Ensure a class has only one instance and provide a global point of access
        to it.

    Builder - Separate the construction of a complex object from its representation, 
        allowing the same construction process to create various representations.
        Intent - reduce solution to telescoping constructor anti-pattern, instead of using
        numerous constructs, use another object, a builder.

    Lazy initialization - Delay some operation until the first time it is needed.

    Object pool - Avoid expensive acquision and release of resources by recycling objects that
        are no longer in use.

    Multiton


Structural Patterns

    Adapter/Wrapper/Translator - Convert the interface of a class into another interface
        clients expect.  An adapter lets classes work together that could not otherwise
        because of incompatible interfaces. The original classes don't change.

    Decorater/Wrapper
        Attach additional responsibilities to an object dynamically keeping the same interface. 

    Bridge - it's used to decouple an abstraction from it's implementation so that the two
        can vary independently.
        Intent - used as an alternative to inheritance.

    Composite - compose objects into tree structures to represent part-whole hierarchies.
        Let's clients treat individual objects and compositions of objects uniformly.

        Make an architectuere where single object instances and collections of these objects
            are treated uniformly.

    Facade -  a single class that represents an entire subsystem.
            provide a unified interface to a set of interfaces in a subsystem.

    Flyweight - Use sharing to support large numbers of similar objects efficiently.

    ##Front Controller -?
        http://martinfowler.com/eaaCatalog/frontController.html
        http://www.oracle.com/technetwork/java/frontcontroller-135648.html
        http://www.tutorialspoint.com/design_pattern/front_controller_pattern.htm
        http://www.sitepoint.com/front-controller-pattern-1/

    Surroage Design Pattern - See Proxy 
    Proxy - provide a surrogate or placeholder for another object to control access to it.
        Might add functionality to the object it's controlling.

        Types
            Remote Proxy, Virtual Proxy, Protection Proxy

        Usage
            Add security access to an existing object.
            Simplify API of complex objects.
            Provide interface for remote resources, such as a web service or REST resource
            Adding a thread safe feature to an existing class without changing the existing 
            class code 

    #DAO - Data access object, providing some specific operations without exposing details of the 
        database Because the interface exposed by the DAO to clients does not change when the 
        underlying data source implementation changes, this allows the DAO to adapt to different 
        storage schemes without affecting it's clients or business components.  Essentially, the 
        DAO acts as an adapter between the component and the data source.


Behavioral Patterns
    Chain of responsibility - consists of a source of command objects and a series of 
        processing objects.  Each processing object contains logic that defines the types
        of commands objects that it can handle, the rest are passed to the next processing
        object in the chain.  A mechanism also exists for adding new processing objects
        to the end of this chain.

    #Command  - object behavioral pattern that allows us to achieve complete decoupling between 
        the sender and the receiver.  With decoupling, the sender has no knowledger of the 
        receiver's interface.

    Interpreter - Define a mechanism to understand and act upon the grammar, decoupling grammar from underlying expressions.

    Iterator - provide a way to access the elements of an aggreagate object sequentially without
        exposing its underlying representation.

    ##Mediator - allows loose coupling by encapsulating the way disparte sets of objects interact 
        and communicate with each other. Objects no longer communicate directly with each other, 
        but instead communicate through the mediator.

    Memento - Capture and externalize an object's internal state allowing the object to be 
        restored to this state later. Another way is to just serialize the object.

    Null Object - avoid null references by providing a default object.

    Observe / Publish/subscribe - Defines a one to many dependency between objects where
        a state change in one object results in all its dependents being notified and 
        updated automatically.

    Servant
    Specification

    #State - Allows an object to alter its behavior when its internal state changes.   The object 
        will appear to change its class.

    Strategy - enables an algorithm behavior to be selected at runtime.

    #Template Method - define the skelenton of an algorithm in an operation defering some steps 
        to subclasses.  Template method lets subclasses redfine certain steps of an algorithm 
        without changing the algorithm's structure.

    Visitor - Represent an operation to be peformed on the elements of an object structure. 
        Visitor let's you define a new operation without changing the classes of the elements on 
        which it operators.  Separate an algorithm from the object structure on which it operatos.


S - Single responsibility principle
O - Open/closed principle
L - Liskov subsitution principle
I - Interface segreation principle
D - Dependency inversion principle

DRY - Don't repeat yourself
GRASP (OOP) - General Responsibility Assignment Software Patterns
KISS - keep it simple stupid. Less is more. Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication.
YAGNI - You aint gonna need it. Keep it simple, continously refactory, continously automate unit test, continously integrate.


ATDD - Acceptance test driven development
BDD - Behavior driven development
DDD - Domain driven design
RERO - Release early, Release often


Lean principles
    1. Eliminate waste
    2. Amplify learning
    3. Decide as late as possible
    4. Deliever as fast as possible
    5. Empower the team
    6. Build quality in
    7. See the whole
